## Exokeeper III

Welcome to Exokeeper III, an ecosystem simulator created for the TINS 2025 Game Jam.

Find this online at: https://tins.amarillion.org/entry/333/

## How to play

You start with a barren, cold, empty planet. At the start, the planet is completely frozen. The poles of the planet are colder than 217 °K, that's cold enough to make carbon dioxide freeze!

The *goal* of the game is to terraform the planet, and reach a nice temperate average of 298 °K.

You do this by introducing various micro-organisms. Introducing photosynthesising species will release oxygen, making the planet suitable for higher forms of life. Microorganisms will also stain the white snow, lowering the albedo of the planet. A lower albedo means more heat from the sun is retained, thus warming the planet.

Just click on a suitable area, click one of the 12 species buttons, and click "Introduce species". You can click on the "Info" button to get more details on a given species.

Using the buttons at the bottom, you can switch between the regular planet view, a heatmap, and an albedo overlay, to get more insight into the planetary parameters. If you want to examine a single spot for a while, you can toggle the planet view.

After a while, species will start evolving. Will the new mutants survive better?

Some tips for playing:

* The game looks harder than it is. Just keep at it, you don't have to understand every number on the screen in order to play. 
* Be patient! I've designed the game to be a long-running background game. Just introduce a few species and have a cup of coffee, come back and see what happened.
* A species will indicate (in red) what is ailing it. Just click on an area and look at the details on the right.
* The equator is the hottest, and the poles are coolest.
* If a species complains that there is not enough oxygen, you need to introduce more plant (photosynthesizing) species.
* Plants (producers), Animals (consumers) and Fungi (reducers) are all needed to form a thriving ecosystem.

## Implementation of the rules

genre rule #136: Food & Nutrition

The game is an ecosystem simulator. Creatures eat each other to survive. There are plants taking nutrients from the environment, herbivores to eat the plants, and carnivores to eat the herbivores.

art rule #180: Cute and adorable – Happy animals, sunny days, joyful characters full of shiny smiles and child-like color palettes.

We attempted to make the little critters as cute as we can. They are all colored with friendly pastel shades. With the power of evolution, there is a near infinite variety.

tech rule #4: Use Layers

Layers are used in two ways. The organisms are generated by combining four layers (Drawn using layers in aseprite). Secondly, you can toggle temperature and albedo overlays on the =planet map.

tech rule #131: Incorporate the golden ratio (φ = 1.618) somewhere.

The golden ratio is used in two ways. Firstly, the planet is generated using the fibonacci sphere algorithm, which makes use of the golden ratio. Secondly, the music doesn't have a regular time signature, but makes use of the fibonacci series in its composition.

bonus rule #36: Double or nothing: discard one rule, but in exchange you must implement another rule in multiple ways. The extra implementation must be really notable.

We don't invoke the bonus rule.

## Re-use and credits

### Re-use:

I re-used parts of [Exokeeper II](https://github.com/amarillion/krampus20). In particular, most of the simulation and the user interface are re-used, as well as the biotope graphics.

What's different compared to the original? The 3D planet view, evolution and the infite variety in organism sprites, the various planet overlays, the music and the title screen, plus a whole bunch of minor tweaks.

### Credits:

* Sprites and title screen by Max
* Programming by Amarillion
* Music by AniCator
* The original Exokeeper was created by Amarillion, Gekaremi, Tatiana Kondratieva and Dónall O'Donoghue.

### AI use: 

Github Co-pilot was used during programming. No AI was used to generate assets.

## Source code & Dependencies

You can find the source code for this program on github:

https://github.com/amarillion/tins2025

To compile you'll also need my experimental D+Allegro Game engine called Dtwist:

https://github.com/amarillion/dtwist/

Other dependencies are [D](https://dlang.org), [Allegro](https://liballeg.org), and [DAllegro](https://github.com/SiegeLord/DAllegro5)

